FEA Callbacks API (#33322)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/developers/callback_support.rst

.. _callbacks_support:

===========================================
Implementing callback support in estimators
===========================================

.. currentmodule:: sklearn.callback

Adding callback support in an estimator boils down to enabling the registration of
callbacks, expressing :term:`fit` as a tree of tasks, and invoking the callbacks at the
beginning and end of each of these tasks. To achieve this, scikit-learn provides the
following helpers from the :mod:`~sklearn.callback` module:

- :class:`~CallbackSupportMixin`, which enables callback registration and initializes
  callback handling at the beginning of fit.

> - :class:`~CallbackContext`, which represents tasks and is the central object to manage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :class:`~CallbackContext`, which represents tasks and is the central object for managing
```
nit

  callbacks during fit.

> - :func:`~with_callbacks`, to guarantee proper callback teardown at the end of fit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :func:`~with_callbacks` decorator, to guarantee proper callback teardown at the end of fit.
```
?

Author: The types of the 3 helpers are described in their dedicated section. I don't think it's necessary to do it at this point

The CallbackSupportMixin class
------------------------------

To support callbacks, an estimator must inherit from the :class:`~CallbackSupportMixin`
class, which exposes the following methods:

- :meth:`~CallbackSupportMixin.set_callbacks`, a public method to be called by the user
  to register callbacks on the estimator.

- :meth:`~CallbackSupportMixin._init_callback_context`, which should be called at the
  beginning of fit to create the root :class:`~CallbackContext`, corresponding to the

>   task that represents the entire execution of `fit`. This method also sets up the

Reviewer: Subtask contexts are created via this root context right? Could this be mentioned here?

Author: I hoped that the fact that it's the root implied that all others are descendents of the root :)

Reviewer: Hmm yes now I read it again I see your point. It was not the tree structure but more the implementation I was thinking to make clearer.

It wasn't immediately obvious that init-ing the root also created the object that holds the tree structure info. e.g., it could have also been that you init the object that holds the tree structure info first, then add the root *and* sub tasks via methods. If that makes sense?

  callbacks that are registered on the estimator.

  .. note::

      While the leading underscore signals that
      :meth:`~CallbackSupportMixin._init_callback_context` is intended for internal
      use and should not appear in auto-completion suggestions for end users, it is
      made available to developers building third-party estimators and should be
      considered part of the public API contract.

The CallbackContext class
-------------------------

The :class:`~CallbackContext` objects are responsible for invoking the callbacks at the

> right time during fit. They track the different tasks of the estimator, with one context

Reviewer: Maybe?

```suggestion
right time during fit. They track the different tasks of the estimator, with one context instance
```

representing each task, and capture the tree structure of the tasks involved in the
execution of the fit method.

.. _callback_task_definition:

A task is an arbitrary unit of work defined by the estimator. Usually, a task
corresponds to an iteration of the estimator's learning algorithm. They can also
correspond to steps of a pipeline, cross-validation folds, etc. As tasks can be
decomposed into subtasks, the tasks (and therefore callback contexts) have a natural
tree structure, with the root task being the whole fit task.

The callback context objects follow this tree structure, holding references to their

> parent and children contexts, dynamically built during `fit`. The root context must be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parent and children contexts and are dynamically built during `fit`. The root context must be
```

created by the :meth:`~CallbackSupportMixin._init_callback_context` method.

.. dropdown:: examples of task / context trees

    .. _example_task_tree:

>     As an example, KMeans has two nested loops: the outer loop is controlled by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    As an example, :class:`~sklearn.cluster.KMeans` has two nested loops: the outer loop is controlled by the
```
nit

    `n_init` parameter, and the inner loop is controlled by the `max_iter` parameter.
    Therefore its task tree looks like this::

        KMeans fit (root)
        ├── init 0
        │   ├── iter 0
        │   ├── iter 1
        │   ├── ...
        │   └── iter n
        ├── init 1
        │   ├── iter 0
        │   ├── ...
        │   └── iter n
        └── init 2
            ├── iter 0
            ├── ...
            └── iter n

    where each innermost `iter j` task corresponds to the computation of the labels
    and centers for the full dataset. A callback registered on a KMeans estimator thus
    will be invoked at the beginning and end of the `fit` task, each of the `init i`

>     tasks and each of the `iter j` tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    will be invoked at the beginning and end of the `fit` task, each of the outer `init i`
    tasks and each of the inner `iter j` tasks.
```

    By convention, for performance reasons and consistency across estimators, the
    innermost tasks of scikit-learn estimators, i.e. the leaves of the task tree,
    correspond to operations on the full input data (or batches for incremental
    estimators).

>     When the estimator is a meta-estimator, a task leaf usually corresponds to fitting a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When the estimator is a meta-estimator, a task leaf usually corresponds to fitting of a
```

Author: Not sure about this one. The meaning is
``a task leaf usually corresponds to (the action of) fitting a sub-estimator``.
Alternatively it could be
``a task leaf usually corresponds to *the* fitting *of* a sub-estimator``
(I prefer the first)

Reviewer: Both are good for me, and are clear.

    sub-estimator. Therefore, this leaf and the root task of the sub-estimator actually
    represent the same task. In this case the leaf task of the meta-estimator and the
    root task of the sub-estimator are merged into a single task. The task trees of the
    meta-estimator and the sub-estimator are combined into a single task tree. For

>     instance, a `Pipeline` would have a task tree that looks like this::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    instance, a :class:`~sklearn.pipeline.Pipeline` would have a task tree that looks like this::
```
maybe?

        Pipeline fit (root)
        ├── step 0 | StandardScaler fit
        │   └── <insert StandardScaler task tree here>
        └── step 1 | LogisticRegression fit
            └── <insert LogisticRegression task tree here>

To dynamically build the context tree and manage the callbacks during fit, the
:class:`~CallbackContext` class exposes the following methods:

- :meth:`~CallbackContext.subcontext`

>   This method allows to create a context for a subtask. Callback contexts should not be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This method enables creation of a context for a subtask. Callback contexts should not be
```
nit

  created directly but through this method (or `_init_callback_context` for the root
  context).

- :meth:`~CallbackContext.call_on_fit_task_begin` and
  :meth:`~CallbackContext.call_on_fit_task_end`

  .. code-block:: python

      def call_on_fit_task_begin(
          self, *, estimator, X=None, y=None, metadata=None, reconstruction_attributes=None
      ) -> None: ...

      def call_on_fit_task_end(
          self, *, estimator, X=None, y=None, metadata=None, reconstruction_attributes=None
      ) -> bool: ...

  These two methods must be called respectively at the beginning and end of the task
  that the context is responsible for. As their name suggests, they call the
  `on_fit_task_begin` and `on_fit_task_end` methods of the callbacks registered on the
  estimator.

  In addition to the callback context that is implicitly passed to the callbacks, the

>   keyword arguments are used to pass additional information about the state of the

Reviewer: "keyword arguments" -> keyword arguments of `call_on_fit_task_begin/end` ? Pass -> pass to the registered callback?

>   fitting process at the task. It is not expected to provide a value for all of them at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  fitting process at a task. It is not expected to provide a value for all of them at
```
?

>   the beginning and end of every task. Estimators are expected to provide all the values

Reviewer: "the beginning and end of every task" -> does this mean we are talking about `call_on_fit_task_begin/end` here?

Author: yes. I changed to "at every call of these methods"

  that they are capable to produce. Callbacks then adapt their behavior based on the
  provided values for a given task.

  .. dropdown:: The `reconstruction_attributes` kwarg

      When `call_on_fit_task_begin/end` is called, the state of the estimator at this

>       task is likely to be incomplete and thus unable to predict, transform, etc ... The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      task is likely to be incomplete and thus unable to :term:`predict`, :term:`transform`, etc ... The
```

      `reconstruction_attributes` kwarg expects a dictionary containing the missing

>       attributes to set on the estimator to make it ready as if the fit had stopped at

Reviewer: "ready" -> as in ready to run predict ?

Author: yes, i added it

      this task.

      The callback context will copy the state of the estimator at this task, set the
      reconstruction attributes and pass the resulting estimator to the callbacks as
      `fitted_estimator`.

      If no additional attributes are needed to make the estimator ready, an empty
      dictionary should be passed instead of leaving the default value otherwise the
      callback context won't pass a `fitted_estimator` to the callbacks.

  .. dropdown:: Lazy-loading of the kwargs

      For each of these kwargs, a callable can be provided instead of the actual value.
      When it is the case, if a callback requires the kwarg, the callback context will
      evaluate the callable and forward the returned value to the callback. This

>       mechanism enables lazy-loading the kwarg values, to avoid potentially costly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      mechanism enables lazy-loading of the kwarg values, to avoid potentially costly
```

      computations when no callback requires a kwarg value.

      To prevent performance degradations, estimators should lazily pass quantities
      that are expensive to compute.

  .. dropdown:: Interrupting `fit`

      The `call_on_fit_task_end` method returns a boolean, which can be used to
      interrupt the current level of iterations, to implement early stopping for
      instance. It returns `True` if any callback signaled to stop the `fit` process at
      the end of this task and `False` otherwise.

- :meth:`~CallbackContext.propagate_callback_context`.

>   This method allows to combine the context trees of individual estimators and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This method enables combination of the context trees of individual estimators and
```

  meta-estimators in estimator compositions (e.g. a `GridSearchCV` on a
  `LogisticRegression`) into a single context tree, rooted at the fit of the top level
  estimator.

  It should be used in a meta-estimator, on a context corresponding to the task of
  fitting a sub-estimator. This task is both a leaf task of the meta-estimator and the
  root task of the sub-estimator. Their corresponding contexts are thus merged into a

>   single context in the combined tree.

Reviewer: Maybe a tree diagram (like in the SLEP) would be useful for understanding/illustration here?

Reviewer: A code example could even be helpful, if you don't think it would be too much.

Author: i think it will be better to link to the example for implementing callback support in an estimator or meta-estimator when it's merged (https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/pull/33771)

decorated with the :func:`~with_callbacks` decorator. This decorator guarantees that the
callbacks are torn down after `fit` finishes, even if it exits on an error.

For scikit-learn's built-in estimators, the :func:`~sklearn.base._fit_context` decorator
already takes care of the callbacks teardown, thus `with_callbacks` should not be used.

Minimal example
---------------

Here is a typical implementation of callback support in a custom estimator:

.. code-block:: python

    from sklearn.callback import CallbackSupportMixin, with_callbacks

    class MyEstimator(CallbackSupportMixin):
        def __init__(self, max_iter):
            self.max_iter = max_iter

        @with_callbacks
        def fit(self, X, y):
            callback_ctx = self._init_callback_context(max_subtasks=self.max_iter)
            callback_ctx.call_on_fit_task_begin(estimator=self, X=X, y=y)

            for i in range(self.max_iter):
                subcontext = callback_ctx.subcontext(task_name="iteration")
                subcontext.call_on_fit_task_begin(estimator=self, X=X, y=y)

                # Do something

                if subcontext.call_on_fit_task_end(estimator=self, X=X, y=y):

>                     break

Reviewer: I know we mention it above, but since it is in a dropdown could we add a comment on why this `break` is here? And that this is optional and not all estimators need to have it?

Author: This will be explained in details in the gallery example. For now there's a TODO below but the goal is to link it here

Reviewer: It is also explained in a dropdown just above too, but a quick comment e.g., # Enables early stopping would be nice. Okay either way though.
